# txt2px

- GitHub project: https://github.com/jcsahnwaldt/txt2px
- GitHub pages: https://jcsahnwaldt.github.io/txt2px/

Small JavaScript class that encodes text (UTF-8 bytes) as pixels (RGB bytes) in a [canvas](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Canvas_API). The canvas data can be downloaded by taking a screenshot, and decoded back to text by [Netpbm](http://netpbm.sourceforge.net/) tools.

Probably not really useful. Just a little hack.

## Usage

### Encoding text

```html
<script src="txt2px.js"></script>

<!-- absolute position may simplify taking screenshots, especially in headless mode -->
<canvas id="canvas" style="position: absolute; left: 0px; top: 0px"></canvas>

<script>
let canvas = document.getElementById('canvas');
  
// If width * height * 3 is less than the number of UTF-8 bytes in the text, the text will be truncated.
// Other than that, the specific values of width and height don't really matter.
canvas.width = 5;
canvas.height = 10;
  
// create TxtCanvas, pre-fill with spaces (ASCII 32)
let txtCanvas = new TxtCanvas(canvas, 32);

// write text
txtCanvas.write('Hello World');
</script>
```

### Decoding text

Install Netpbm first. On macOS: `brew install netpbm`

In theory, the following *should* work: Load [test.html](test.html) in your browser, make a screenshot of the canvas area, save the screenshot as a PNG file `screenshot.png`, and decode the text with `pngtopam screenshot.png`.

In practice, it probably *won't* work, because the PNG screenshot won't be an exact representation of the canvas pixels. But it *does* work in headless mode. See next section.

## Browser automation

### Chrome / Firefox

Chrome and Firefox have almost the same command line interface for headless mode. The [test.sh](test.sh) script runs commands similar to the following (the paths to the Chrome and Firefox binaries only work on macOS):

```
$ "/Applications/Firefox.app/Contents/MacOS/firefox" --headless --screenshot --window-size=15,10 "file://$(pwd)/test.html?width=15&height=10"
*** You are running in headless mode.
$ pngtopam screenshot.png | tail -n +4
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet,
consectetur adipiscing elit,
...                                                             
```

```
$ "/Applications/Google Chrome.app/Contents/MacOS/Google Chrome" --headless --screenshot --window-size=15,10 "file://$(pwd)/test.html?width=15&height=10"
Written to file screenshot.png.
$ pngtopam screenshot.png | tail -n +4
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet,
consectetur adipiscing elit,
...
```

### Safari

Open test.html in Safari:

```
osascript -e 'tell application "Safari" to open location "'"file://$(pwd)/test.html?width=15&height=10"'"'
```

Note: `/Applications/Safari.app/Contents/MacOS/Safari` can't handle URLs with queries. :-(

Enter full screen mode and disable toolbar (menu View > Always show toolbar in full screen). TODO: Find AppleScript commands for this.

Then take a screenshot:

```
osascript -e 'tell application "Safari" to activate' && screencapture -T1 -R0,0,15,10 screenshot.png
```

Alas, this doesn't work. Although the PNG generated by `screencapture` is 12 to 18 times larger than the PNGs generated by Chrome and Firefox, it looks exactly the same (even Digital Color Meter shows the same sRGB values). But there seem to be subtle differences: for about 75% of the bytes, `pngtopam` produces slightly different values, and the text is garbled.

Safari *does* produce the correct PNG data when I right-click on the canvas, click 'Inspect Element', right click on the `<canvas>` element, click 'Capture Screenshot'. `pngtopam` produces the correct text from this PNG.

## Background

My original goal was to enable a script to start a browser, run some JavaScript in the browser, and get result messages from the browser, but without having to install tools like Selenium. I thought it should be easy to pass data from the browser back to the script, e.g. by saving a file somewhere, or by letting the script access the current DOM, but I didn't find a portable way to do anything like that.

But there's a flag (portable between Chrome and Firefox) to make a screenshot in headless mode, so I wrote a bit of JavaScript code that encodes UTF-8 bytes as pixels. Decoding the pixels is pretty simple because [Netpbm's PAM format](http://netpbm.sourceforge.net/doc/pam.html) has basically the same format as [JavaScript's ImageData.data](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ImageData/data) byte array.

The only slight difficulty is the alpha channel - the screenshot is encoded as a [PNG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portable_Network_Graphics) without an alpha channel. With any opacity less than 100%, the RGB values are altered, and the resulting text is garbled. The fix is pretty simple though: just set all alpha channel bytes to `0xFF` (100% opacity).
